now for today's daily briefing good
afternoon and welcome to the daily
Downing Street coronavirus briefing I'm
joined by Professor Chris witty the
chief medical officer and John Newton
before I turn to the latest coronavirus
data I wanted to say something this
Mental Health Awareness Week I know how
difficult the change and the uncertainty
generated by this awful virus has been
for many people so many moments of joy
have been put on hold
cherished milestones and important
events and time with loved ones and
things that were in the diary that you
might have been looking forward to but
can't any longer take place so I want to
say this to anyone who's finding it hard
these are tough times it is ok to be not
ok and it is normal to feel low and
anxious and unhappy sometimes but it is
so important that if you think you need
it please seek help if you want to talk
to someone please go to the NHS it is
there for you and if you're a health or
care worker there's a bespoke series of
support so we can care for you just as
you care for the rest of us just text
frontline two eight five two five eight
mental health charities are also
offering some brilliant support today
I'm providing a further 4.2 million
pounds
so organizations like the Samaritans and
young minds and mental health UK can
keep doing what they do best
everyone can strengthen their mental
health just in the same way that we keep
our eye on our physical health including
when we're healthy and the pH ease every
mind matters campaign is something that
every single person can engage with and
use to strengthen your mental health and
well-being in good times and in bad so
let's all come together
this Mental Health Awareness Week and
support each other
turning to the daily figures we've now
completed over three million tests for
coronavirus in total three million 90
thousand five hundred and sixty-six
tests have been carried out in the UK
including one hundred and twenty eight
thousand three hundred and forty tests
yesterday two hundred and fifty thousand
nine hundred and eight people have
tested positive that's an increase of
two thousand six hundred and fifteen
cases since yesterday nine thousand five
hundred and forty three people are
currently in hospital with coronavirus
that is a 14 percent fall from the same
time last week sadly of those who tested
positive for coronavirus across all
settings 36 thousand and 42 have now
died and that's an increase of three
hundred and thirty-eight fatalities
since yesterday this is a deadly virus
and it's brought pain to so many both
hearing across the world but we are
making some real progress and I'd like
to take a moment to remind everyone
about our plan to defeat corona virus
and get Britain moving once again slide
one please as you may have seen in
previous briefings we've now put in
place our covert alert level system it
consists of five levels based on the
r-value and the number of new cases this
alert level guides the social distancing
rules which have proved to be so
effective at getting the virus under
control the higher the alert level the
stricter the rules now throughout the
lockdown
we've been at level four as you can see
level four means that corona virus is in
general circulation and that
transmission is either high or
exponentially rising but thanks to your
shared sacrifice we've now brought our
down and because of this caution we're
in a position to start moving to level
three next slide please
and here is how we can move forward
we've set out three steps that we plan
to take carefully to more
by the social distancing rules and start
to restore freedom in this country
all the while avoiding a disastrous
second peak that could overwhelm the NHS
at each step will closely monitor the
impact on our on the number of new
infections and on all available data
we're currently at step one which means
that if you work but you can't work from
home you should speak to your employer
about going back in you can now spend
time outdoors and exercise as often as
you like and you can meet one other
person from outside your household in an
outdoor public place but you should stay
two metres apart we'll move to step two
on the first of June if we are able to
do so step two involves reopening more
things like schools and some retail and
using our tests and trace system to keep
our down will only move to step two and
then in due course to step three when it
is safe to do so next slide please
it's important that we say it's
important that we stay alert and think
about what we can all do to control the
spread of the virus this means of course
staying at home as much as is possible
and working from home if you can it
means hygiene washing your hands and
cleaning surfaces remains absolutely
crucial distance staying two metres
apart wherever possible protection
wearing face coverings on public
transport and in shops and self
isolating all together if you have
symptoms and as we approach a bank
holiday weekend we must all renew our
efforts over the course of this pandemic
people all across the UK have been
making difficult but vital sacrifices
for the greater good so let's not go
back to square one we can all play our
part in the national effort to get our
down and keep our down and control the
virus so we restore more of the things
that make life worth living as we follow
our plan our testing regime will be our
guiding star
it's the information that helps us to
search out and defeat this virus over
the past few months we've built a
critical national infrastructure for
testing on a massive scale we've already
put in place the building blocks we
develop the tests we've built the test
centers and the lab capacity we created
the home testing kits that give us all
this gives us clarity and certainty we
hit the hundred thousand tests on time
when we said we would but we're always
striving to go further to expand our
testing capacity and to improve our
understanding this virus there are two
developments that I wanted to share with
you today the first is around swab test
these are the swabs these are the tests
that tell you if you currently have
corona virus as I announced on Monday
anybody over five who has symptoms is
now eligible for a test and getting a
test is important but getting a quick
result is important too we're working
hard on innovative developments and I
wanted to bring you up to speed with
this now it's really important to be
clear about this working with innovative
science always has its risks like all
R&D lots of projects don't come off and
just like for instance vaccines where we
don't know if we'll ever get one but I'm
prepared to back innovative developments
even if they might never happen I think
it's worth it and I think it's worth it
especially in these circumstances to
back things before you know for sure if
they're going to work and I make no
apologies for that we're working with
many top names to help us deliver
testing with a rapid turnaround names
like Oxford nanopore and chronometer and
DNA nudge for example one innovative
company opted to gene has produced an
early test which is by being trialed
from today and it is interesting to us
because it is so fast it doesn't need to
be sent to a lab to be processed and so
you get the result on the spot typically
within around 20 minutes it's already
proven effective in early trials and we
want to find out if it
we'll be effective on a larger scale and
we want to support companies like
optogenetic projects will monitor its
effectiveness very closely and if it
works we'll roll it out as soon as we
can now this is just one of a number of
innovative testing technologies that
we're pushing forward as fast as the
science allows I will need leave no
stone unturned and I want to thank
everybody involved for their dedication
the second development I wanted to share
today is around antibody tests these
tell you if you have had the virus and
have developed antibodies in response
that might help you to fight the virus
in future covert 19 is a new virus and
we're learning more about it every
single day I want to be frank with you
about what we don't know as well as what
we do know we're not yet in a position
to say that those who test positive in
these antibody tests are immune from
coronavirus but as our understanding of
the disease improves the insight these
antibody tests provide will be crucial
they can help us to understand how our
bodies react to coronavirus and how it's
spread across the country we're backing
efforts to develop our own homegrown
antibody test through our UK rapid test
consortium and that work is showing some
early promise and as you know we've been
looking at a whole series of commercial
antibody tests now many of these early
tests were not reliable enough for
clinical use but we have made some
available at the small scale and we now
have the results of our antibodies
surveillance study this has told us that
around 17 percent of people in London
and around 5 percent or higher in the
rest of the country have tested positive
for coronavirus antibodies this was
based on a sample but for the public at
large to know whether or not they've had
coronavirus we need antibody tests at
larger scale
to lab based products produced by rosh
diagnostics and abbott labs have been
given a positive evaluation by phe and
approved by the MHRA and three further
tests are being assessed right now and i
can announce today that we have signed
contracts to supply in the coming months
over ten million tests from rosh and
abbot from next week we'll begin rolling
these out in a phased way at first to
health and care staff patients and
residents the UK government has arranged
supplies of these tests on behalf of the
devolved administration's and each
devolved nation is deciding how to use
its tests allocation and how testing
will be prioritized and managed locally
this is an important milestone and it
represents further progress in our
national testing program it's not just
about the clinical advances that these
tests can bring although obviously
that's important it's that knowing that
you have these antibodies will help us
to understand more in the future if you
are at lower risk of catching
coronavirus of dying from corona virus
and of transmitting corona virus we're
developing this critical science to know
the impact of a positive antibody test
and to develop the systems of
certification to ensure people who have
positive antibodies can be given
assurance about what they can safely do
history has shown that understanding an
enemy is fundamental to defeating it and
in this latest fight our ingenuity and
our brilliant scientists and our
scientific curiosity are what will keep
us one step ahead of this virus we all
have something to bring though in this
fight against our common foe one action
that each and every one of us can take
is to follow the rules on hygiene on
social distancing not just for you but
for your loved ones and for your
community so please stay alert control
the virus and save lives I'm now going
to pass to Chris
to take us through the daily charts
thank you very much sector state so this
is first slide to show you is a new
slide with new data that came out today
from the Office of National Statistics
ons and other partners and they've been
doing a random swabbing system around
the country to estimate how many people
have got infection and over time this
the laws also allow us to work out how
many people are newly getting infections
now these are central estimates and I
want to be clear that there are wide
confidence intervals around them but
based on these data they estimate that
about 137 thousand people in England
have had have kovat at this point in
time at this point in time being being
between the 4th of May and the 17th of
May is slightly old data and that this
is around about a quarter of 1% of the
general population and they also
estimate again with quite wide
confidence intervals that every week at
that stage around 60 thousand people
were newly being infected with the virus
so around about 10,000 a day as the are
is still below 1 we expect these numbers
to go down and to continue to go down
next slide please
starting off with what all of us are
doing there is clear evidence firstly
that almost everybody is sticking to the
social distancing guidelines and staying
at home and traveling much less than
they normally would but there is some
increase in activity in terms of people
driving and heavy goods vehicles and
light goods vehicles which are
compatible with people making a very
cautious return to work where that is
considered to be safe but as you can see
on the lower graph here line of the
graphs that the national rail transport
for london and buses really have
remained where we were very few people
using them except for absolutely
essential purposes
next slide please the secretary state
has already talked about testing here's
a graph showing on the top and a top of
the row of this the testing rates this
is a combination of tests done and sent
out and then below that the number of
confirmed cases remember of course that
the number of tests has gone up so the
denominator is changing over time but
they are very gradually drifting down
next slide please
but important data I think here from
hospitals now the key thing here is not
the absolute numbers but the fact is the
trend lines which are measured the same
way over time and what you can see is
overall you can see the estimated new
daily admissions with Cove in nineteen
peaked in early April that has been
steadily decreasing ever since and the
same is true for those who unfortunately
are unfortunate enough to have severe
disease and have to have mechanical
ventilation and the proportion the
mechanically ventilated beds these are
beds where people are having to be
supported in intensive or critical care
units in all of England Wales Scotland
and Northern Ireland are steadily
decreasing over time next slide please
and looking at people with Cove AIDS who
are in hospital as you can see the
pattern varies slightly around the
country and the Four Nations but in all
of them the trend is downwards next
slide please
if you look now this is a slide which
has been shown for some time there was a
slight variation though be showed it
again the key thing is not the absolute
numbers the key thing is the shape the
Secretary of State has laid out the
numbers on the left but as you can see
the trend line for people who have sadly
died with confirmed test tests for coded
in hospitals and social care settings is
steadily decreasing and this trend
continues now I've added on two extra
slides at the end both of these from
ons the office for national statistics
I've saved several times in some of
these briefings that the most important
metric for mortality is all cause
mortality which is if all the people
who've died of whatever cause and the
reason for that is that it captures not
only people who were diagnosed with
coded but also potentially people who
might have indirectly died as a result
of this epidemic and here what you have
is it's the whole of the year and as you
can see there was a very significant
that dotted line shows the the average
number of deaths for this time of year
over the last five years and what you
can see is there was a significant peak
of this which coincided with the peak in
Cova deaths but the all-cause mortality
has come down at the same time as the
Cova deaths have come down and he's now
at roughly the rate it is at in an
average winter so we essentially are
having a winter in health terms in terms
of mortality but in late spring and
early summer and this is likely to have
a gradual tail off over time we're not
expecting this suddenly to return to the
baseline we finally I want just to show
the shape of the number of excess deaths
again these are all causes of death
these are the number of deaths in excess
of what you'd expect at this time of
year compared to previous years and on
the left
what we have is hospitals acute on
community hospitals and as you can see
there was a significant peak in excess
all cause mortality in early April and
that has come right down now till it's
very close to baseline in the last week
he was looked at it was a bank holiday
week so we need to be a little bit
careful of over interpreting that that
fall and the very last week and if you
look at care homes the other thing which
people are rightly very concerned about
again the care home deaths have peaked
and have come down a long way but that
peak was slightly later I was one to two
weeks after the peak in hospitals
thank you very much thanks very much
indeed Chris we're going to first go to
questions from the public and then from
the media so if we go to if we go to
Marsh in Coventry
who's going to us on video coronavirus
death rate being relatively high will
you be advising the Muslim community to
stay at home or stay alert during the
upcoming three-day celebration of Eid if
not what is your advice for them as a
member I am concerned that some people
may be finding ways to flout the rules
like having garden parties or gatherings
well thank you much
I want to firstly say how much we
appreciate all those who through Ramadan
have followed the social distancing
rules the clear evidence is that the
Muslim community in the UK and indeed
across the world have have done so much
in order to respect what's needed with
the social distancing role so I want to
say thank you I know that Eid is coming
up and I appreciate that many people
won't be able to celebrate in the normal
way because of social distancing and
it's normally a time when people come
together so I hope that I hope that
people can enjoy Eid celebrations but I
know that they'll be different from
usual so my wish I want to say Eid
Mubarak and I want to pass over to
Professor Witte to give you the clinical
advice very specifically and that you
that you asked for well so the clear
answer for all faiths is people will
have to adapt the celebrations the
joyful celebrations around the current
social distancing rules and everybody
knows what those rules are and they
remain the same for every community and
the reason we must all do that is this
is to protect the whole community all
communities and all of us must find ways
around this of whatever faith but I know
that all Muslim colleagues and Friends
of mark
our adapting as every other faith has
adapted over this period their
celebrations to make sure they can
maintain both the celebration but also
maintain the social distancing which is
absolutely critical to keeping the are
below one and the transmission rates
going down across the whole of the UK
thanks very much the next question is
from Finley Finley asks if a vaccine is
developed will it be mandatory and if
not how will you bridge the difference
of opinion between those who believe it
necessary and those who do not well
Finley the first point to make is that
we're doing everything we can to get a
vaccine and and we will only recommend a
vaccine if it is safe and that means
that if we get a vaccine and I very much
hope that we will and we're working
incredibly hard for that and people are
asked to to vaccinate to take that
vaccine then they absolutely should
because we'll only do it on the basis of
clinical advice that is safe the
question of whether it's mandatory is
not one that we've addressed yet which
still some time off a vaccine being
being available but I would hope given
the scale of this crisis and given the
overwhelming need for us to to get
through this and to get the country back
on back on its feet and the very
positive impact that a vaccine would
have that there that everybody would
would would have the vaccine can I add
an additional point on that which is
since essentially a technical point if
you think about vaccines a lot of
different sorts of vaccines but you can
broadly use them in two ways the first
way it the way which everybody thinks
about is as an epidemic modifying
vaccine this is you give it to the whole
community
rather like MMR and that protects
everybody from getting these infections
but the other way you can use a vaccine
is that you can use it as a disease
modifying vaccine you give the vaccine
to those people who are most at risk and
you might do this because there aren't
and there isn't enough vaccine so you'd
want to protect the people on those
vulnerable or you might do it because
it's a partially if
effective vaccine that can stop people
dying but is not enough to stop the
transmission of the virus and in that
case you would give it to a much smaller
number of people now clearly in that
second group you are absolutely doing it
only to protect the person who is being
vaccinated and if they choose not to
have that protection
it doesn't affect anybody else that is
simply their choice but then they
obviously are denying themselves the
protection that this kind of vaccine
could provide thanks very much Chris
John well sir just a more general
observation about vaccine programs that
the most successful vaccine programs
tend to be blind consent so what really
matters is clear explanation of the
benefits and risks any risks that are
safe with a vaccine and a really good
system to make the vaccine available to
everybody who needs it so although some
countries have adopted mandatory
programs that most successful programs
tend to be done on the basis of consent
good information and good delivery
mechanisms but clearly foundation is
there can we use in some instances
thanks very much
professor Newton will now go to Laura
Coombs Berg of the BBC Laura thank you
very much Secretary of State and did the
prime minister change his mind on making
health and care workers from overseas
paid towards the NHS or was he just
worried about losing a vote and can I
ask you also on social care can you
confirm that you are planning to
introduce a cap on care costs in England
and you accept this crisis has shown
that reform of the system cannot we put
off again thanks Laura
and the prime minister is asked the Home
Secretary and I to work on how we can
remove NHS and care workers from the NHS
surcharge as soon as possible and I'm
very pleased to be able to do that I've
already spoken to the Home Secretary and
will be saying more on how we do this in
the next few days and the prime minister
has clearly himself been a beneficiary
of carers from abroad and we've talked
many times during this during this
crisis about the enormous contribution
that people from overseas make to the
NHS and to social care so the the
purpose of the immigration health
surcharge within the
chess is a fair one and the purpose is
to ensure that everybody contributes to
the NHS but also those who work within
the NHS and within the social care are
themselves making that contribution
directly so having so that so the Prime
Minister has has made that decision and
he's asked us to make it happen on
social care more broadly as you know we
put in the manifesto on which we were
elected the need to reform Social Care I
would say that the crisis has
demonstrated the need to bring health
and social care closer together
colleagues in Social Care worked so
closely and are working so closely with
the NHS much more closely in this crisis
than I have ever seen before yet there
are organizational and bureaucratic
boundaries that that hold them apart and
and so I can confirm that where we're
working as we set out in the manifesto
on making sure that Social Care is as
strong and sustainable as it possibly
can be in the future so that it we have
a sustainable system that gives people
the dignity that they crave as they grow
old and for adults of working age yes
course can you tell us when that plan
will emerge and can you confirm that
that would include a cap on care costs
for individuals sometimes you end up
having to sell their homes in order to
pay what we have been clear on that
second point absolutely that people
shouldn't have to sell their homes to
pay for their care that principles are
very clearly set out in the manifesto
and it's something that I think is very
important
and I've seen the injustice of you know
it's impossible to know in advance
whether especially in older age whether
you're going to need care or not and
there is no system of insurance to be
able for people to be able to do
anything about those those costs so I've
seen injustice of that we've set out
that we will address that as part of the
reforms in the manifesto and I'd love to
give you an update on timing
but we have got all the work or urgent
work on coronavirus to do with at the
same time and so I'm not able to give
you any firm commitment on timing I'm
afraid thanks very much I'm Dan Huot
from ITV good afternoon good afternoon
health secretary and research from the
food foundation shared with us show the
number of households struggling to get
access to enough food or skipping or
rationing meals has doubled since the
start of this crisis that includes 1.7
million children given we don't know
when this crisis will end does the
government have a long-term plan beyond
what it's already done to help millions
of struggling families and secondly if I
may yesterday the Prime Minister
insisted it was the right thing to do
and to charge migrant health workers to
use the NHS now he says it's the wrong
thing to do what exactly happened in the
last 24 hours to make him change his
mind
well the Prime Minister yesterday gave
an answer about the immigration health
surcharge as a whole and has asked the
Home Secretary and I to work on making
sure that NHS and care workers don't
have to pay it so that's the explanation
to the second part of your question on
the first part and you're absolutely
right to ask that this is incredibly
important it's something that that we
worry about making sure that people get
access to the basics and no matter what
their circumstances we've introduced the
program for those who are being shielded
because they're clinically vulnerable
2.2 million people who have the offer of
support and we've delivered over a
million food parcels to to those who who
need them who when they're contacted by
the NHS are asked all of those 2.2
million or asked do you need help for
instance with food and we've been able
to give them that support and also
connected them to supermarkets and I
want to pay tribute to the supermarkets
who've done incredible work for the
shielded but there's also a group of non
shielded people who are vulnerable and
they may in some circumstances they
might not be clinically more vulnerable
but they are vulnerable and this is one
of the many impacts one of the many bad
things about this virus is it can be
harder for some vulnerable people to
deal with the consequences of the virus
like all the social distancing and so we
have a program in place to support them
as well
and we've put significant amounts of
money into the shielding program and
local support coordinated locally by
councils and it's it's an incredibly
important part of the support and I
think you're absolutely right right to
raise it down thanks very much
Beth Rigby from Sky thank you I'm
Secretary of State the government's own
David 19 recovery strategy states in
black and white that an app system needs
to be built and successfully integrated
for the track and trace system to work
but now the government's saying the
system can function effectively without
it was your strategy document wrong or
have you moved the goal posts and if I
made a professor Newton Oxford
scientists are advising the government
on the contact tracing app say test
results need to come back within 24
hours to stop the spread of the virus I
know you've just announced this new swab
trial but how long do tests take at the
moment thanks Beth so on the first one
of those we're absolutely clear that the
tests and trace system needs to be in
place and that is on track for delivery
by the 1st of June and and as you know
we've been hiring the contact tracers
and and we've hit the deadlines for
those and they are in place 24,000 as of
yesterday and we have got the testing
capacity and the technology is an
important part but it is not the only
part and in fact what are the lessons
from the Isle of Wight is that getting
the human contact tracing in so that
people understand the consequences of if
you have been in close contact with
somebody to test positive and somebody
calls you and asks you to
therefore say it says that you have to
self isolate that is it is important
that that is done properly the app is as
you know working in the Isle of Wight we
want to make sure that this whole system
lands well and supports the ability
safely to make changes to social
distancing rules and the system will as
the Prime Minister said yesterday we
have high confidence that the system
will be in place by the 1st of June and
then it will grow stronger and stronger
John Thank You secretary state yes it's
a good question it's important to
understand that the test and trace
program has more than one component and
quarter this is the public health
contact tracing which is used
internationally it's recommended by a wh
a its public health good practice we
used it in the containment phase so
somebody who tests positive is contacted
and asked firstly to self isolate
themselves and for their households
ourself isolate and then they'll be
asked about their contacts their close
contacts and those contacts are then are
then contacted and informed and given
advice that's a process which is
completely independent of the proximity
app although it is in fact it's
augmented with a an online information
system which is web-based and this will
all become a little bit clearer when we
introduce it but all that workers is now
in place and we are ready to go with
that system in fact it was used as I say
in the containment phase and we've had a
very successful trial or it in the Isle
of Wight in addition to that process for
people in the general public the app is
a is an additional component which tells
you if your phone has been close to
another phone with the app in such a way
that you might have been in contact with
somebody who have the risk of passing on
coronavirus so that can be layered on
top of the more personal contact tracing
which is which is driven by the public
health process and the telephone process
so they are distinct but complementary
and it's perfectly okay in fact possibly
advantageous to introduce the one
for the other thank you thanks Batman in
terms of the I'm sorry in terms of the
timing of the test say you're absolutely
right that the sooner the tests come
back the sooner people can be alerted
about their risk and the more effective
the process is so we're working very
hard to get these turnaround times down
at the moment
90% of tests come back within the
results come back within 48 hours of the
tests being done and almost half of
those that are back within 24 hours so
many people will get the result the same
day but with we're introducing various
ways of reducing that time to the
absolute minimum I just ask that you
accept that you do need to get the tests
back within 24 hours for the system to
work exhaustion II a lots riding on this
in terms of public confidence yes indeed
there's there's no specific cuffs off
the the sooner you can get the tests
back the better but we have we've been
in discussion with modelers at Sage and
models have been built based on 80% of
the tests coming back within 48 hours so
we know that the effectiveness would be
there with pretty much the level of
performance we have now but we would
like to get it better we would like to
get the tests back even more quickly
because we know that it will be more
more more effective if we can do the
testing more quickly
thanks very much Beth Laura Hughes from
the FT if we never needed this app to
launch a trap-and-trace system why is it
still taken for the 1st of June to
launch this army of human races could we
not have got them in place earlier while
we were ramping up testing capacity and
also asked how many daily tests do you
estimate your new test and trace system
is going to need for it to work yeah
well two very good questions I'll ask
John Newton to come in on it and the
point about the app is the app is
working in the Isle of Wight but rolling
an app out especially one of such
significance because if it if you
download the app and you've been in
close contact with someone it tells you
that you are at higher risk of having
caught coronavirus we want to make sure
that is that rolls out in exactly the
the right way and one of the things
we've learnt from the Isle of Wight is
making sure the importance of getting
that order and so we we've chosen to do
it in this order and the reason that for
the timings is that it interacts with
the with the the changes and move to
step two of the lockdown which is
scheduled to happen no earlier than the
1st of June whilst we're all in lockdown
the implications of being told that you
yourself need to go into lockdown are
smaller than where as those social
restrictions ease and so that's the
interaction with step two and the
critical point is that we of course when
the number of new cases was much higher
than the ability to do the contact
tracing as much more difficult and less
effective but as Professor Witte has
just demonstrated with the new
statistics published this morning from
the Office of National Statistics
with around 61 thousand new new cases
per week that is the sort of scale that
the contact tracing that we are bringing
into place will be able to grapple with
and we've always said that the tests and
trade system will be more effective the
lower the number of new cases and social
distancing is bringing down that number
of new cases to a point where the where
the test and trace system will be able
to to hold are down John I don't know if
you want to add anything well secretary
you put it over the the time for the for
the test and trace program is is a
little bit later on as social distancing
starts to relax and in terms of the
numbers and of course we are we haven't
stopped doing contact tracing that
public I think that still does contact
tracing to investigate outbreaks for
example at the moment so it's a question
of increasing the scope and the scale at
which we do contact tracing in in a
progressive way and hiring the staff the
core Public Health staff who do the more
who do the the more complex contact
tracing already in place and our have
been in place throughout but we are
recruiting additional staff as they're
needed it clearly wouldn't have been
sensible to recruit twenty thousand
people and have them not not doing
anything at the moment they're going
through training and making sure that
everyone's ready for when we do need to
introduce the the new program so I think
it's all it's all being introduced in a
very measured and an effective way in
terms of the numbers as Professor Witte
pointed out the ONS estimates there may
be something like ten thousand new cases
a day at the moment we're seeing around
two thousand positive tests a day so
these are very manageable numbers and
they the trajectory is for those to
decline at the moment so those are very
manageable numbers for the sort of for
the test and trace program to take on
thank you thanks very much
yeah of course very quickly it's a risk
though that as you introduce this new
system you're also loosening lockdown
measures so people will be going back to
school for example and are you not
concerned that the number of day
infections could start to go up is there
a point where we see their levels so
high that the system stops working
because they don't have the capacity to
deal with it anymore do you have a
figure for that and a threshold under
which you might have to roll back
because it won't be able to work anymore
well we now have through the
surveillance testing a much greater
clarity on what the level of our is and
a clear goal that our shouldn't go above
what and that is in place to mitigate
against exactly the scenario that you
set out and the goal is to keep the
number of new cases coming down whilst
lifting measures as is social distancing
measures as much as is safely possible
but with the emphasis on safety and of
course once with a test and tray system
in place that that will allow us to do
more on the social distancing release
and safely
and that's that so the two need to be
seen hand-in-hand and it's all about how
do we manage this this epidemic down
using a more targeted focus on people
who are higher risk because they've been
in contact with someone who's tested
positive rather than the blanket
measures that we've got in place at the
moment thanks very much
we now go to Robbie sorry Robbie thank
you thanks for allowing me to ask this
question as a daily minute columnist and
a grassroots football coach
tis Mental Health Awareness Week and we
all know how important all sport is as a
contributor to achieve in healthy minds
and bodies why therefore is it that in
published guidelines by governing bodies
but junior tennis players golfers and
athletes are able to receive one-on-one
coaching sessions but young people who
play the working class game of football
are currently not allowed to thanks
Robbie
well it's good to have you and thanks
for taking part in the press conference
and look I absolutely get the impact of
this of this virus on people's lives and
the mental health impact and for many
people being able to play football is a
is a huge release and and really a
positive thing and the rules are there
of course they can go out and exercise
but I know that yeah exercising just
with members your own household or on
your own is nothing like being able to
play to play football so I get it I
understand why it's a problem
unfortunately these rules have to be in
place amongst amongst the population as
a whole
because we've got to get a grip of this
virus and it's only by following it the
more people follow the rules that faster
will get there the the number of new
cases down and and they're more we're
going to be able to release social
distancing rules and but you don't just
want to have you want to come yeah of
course yeah and then I can Chris witty
to come in yeah so so why why are some
governing bodies you know do allow in
one on one coaching with under-18s
whereas
governing body the fa aunt a flowered
you know the under-18 gamecoach one of
one why is it different
great so fully understand the reason for
the question and I mean - absolutely
reinforce your point exercise of all
sort is good for physical health good
for mental health and that's one of the
reasons we were very keen in the first
very tentative easing of some of the
lock down to make it easier for people
just to do things in our doors and if
it's within their own family then I kind
of kick around in football if we were in
the same row that would in the same
household I kick around in football it's
fine so difference and this is this is
one of the issues that we need to think
about a balance and I think with all of
the things we're trying to do it's about
trying to release where we can but not
take the risk that we actually start
having the transmission again and we
were very confident that it is much
safer to do things the same thing
outdoors than indoors so that's the
first thing and that's part of the
reason we were able to do things but as
you know the rules are except within
your own household it's one other person
nap two meters now it's quite different
that is a small increment from where we
are now it is possible to play the kind
of sports you're talking about at two
meters with one other person or within
your own household clearly to have a
kind of league football game which is a
contact sport and does involve a large
not large larger number the risks are
greater so the question is at what stage
accepting that outdoors is safer that
indoors but that a group of 22 people
many of them coming into contact were
and other linking their households is a
much bigger risk than two people who
were at a two meter distance what stage
do we think that the rate is low enough
for that to be a safe thing to do so
that was really that's the logic for
this very very gradual move because we
are very keen both to try and make it
possible particularly for people to do
sport and exercise outdoors for all the
reasons you give but also not in the
process of that to link households again
and start the process of the are going
back up again so that's a long answer
but that's because it's a very serious
question
so can have one more question yes
exactly state so obviously can you or
your scientific colleagues give an
indication of the pathway the grassroots
football being allowed to reach that do
you think we will have to wait for a
vaccine
well I very much hope that we won't have
to wait for a vaccine the first thing
I'd say is that some of the some of the
projects we're putting in place like
this test and tracing that we've been
talking about are there to try to hold
the number of new cases down while it's
allowing more social distancing measures
to be lifted and this is one that we can
look at and we had a discussion about
last time around and Chris is better
placed than me to advise you know how
how how much of an impact upwards it
would have on our and and how much
further we can go well in my expectation
and so Patrick valances exploitation
this is one of his areas of trade
government t-sonic advisor is that a
vaccine before next year on a widespread
basis is very unlikely so I definitely
hope that football will be available
possibly with some degree of change of
how it's played that may have to be some
ways out to think it through in advance
of a vaccine but I think what we're
trying to do is go very very cautiously
along that path that the Secretary of
State talked about but my very strong
hope and I'm sure this is a strong habit
of everybody's football is well before
we get right out to that lead of the
right-hand end of that path because our
doors is safer than indoors no doubt
about it
but mixing large numbers of people in a
contact sport is unfortunately a higher
risk of transmitting as far as
inevitably than something which
currently played in two or maybe four
people at a distance we want grassroots
football back as soon as we safely can
thanks Robbie great to have you on thank
you last question is from Ian Swanson
from the Edinburgh Evening News yeah
thank you and I wanted to ask a couple
of points about the hospitality and
tourism sector which is a crucial part
of Edinburgh economy and potentially one
of the last to reopen from August
employers were up to contribute to the
cost of furlough many bars and
restaurants say if there's
so close that would be impossible and
even if even when they can't open a
social distancing might mean that it's
just not viable
so will the government continue full
funding of fun law for this sector or is
there some new support that it could
offer and secondly many hospitality
businesses fail to qualify for the
retail hospitality and leisure grant
often just because their City Center
location pushes them over the threshold
of 51,000
great all value and is that something
that you would also consider reviewing
well thank you in the the furlough rules
have been set in place as one of the
most generous
schemes in the world and I'm very
pleased that the Chancellor was able to
extend them from the deadline this side
of summer and up to October and clearly
the details of how it operates is for is
for him and for the Treasury and I'll
take your comments back I do understand
the importance of it especially in
Edinburgh which especially during August
traditionally has always relied on such
an enormous influx of visitors for the
biggest festival certainly in the
country if not in the world with the
Edinburgh Festival so I understand the
specific concern and I'll take that away
and talk to the Chancellor about it that
concludes our daily briefing thank you
very much indeed for all of the
questions and hope to see you again soon
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch BBC News live in the app and get
the full story with BBC decoder UK
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with BBC News